Names.
Um, but feel free to, um, introduce yourself.
We have 10 minutes with you, and
after you have finished, uh, speaking to your submission,
there might be questions from members.
Thank you.
Yeah. Please get started when you're ready.
Good morning, Madam Chair and members of the committee.
My name is Hannah Clo,
and I appear on behalf
of the Free Speech Union alongside Douglas Brown, one
of the members of our board.
We have made a submission on the telecommunications
and other matters, bill,
because it has significant implications for freedom
of expression in New Zealand.
For that reason, we oppose the bill.
Before I turn to the bill itself.
It's worth noting how broad the
telecommunications regime is.
A telecommunication covers almost any communication sent
electronically, uh, from texts, messages,
and emails to Fiverr and satellite data.
In short, the regulatory regime touches nearly all forms
of digital communication in New Zealand.
In the time available, I want
to focus on two provisions of the bill.
First, the bill is trying to apply New Zealand laws
and rules to companies based overseas
if they offer services to New Zealand.
These laws include consumer protection codes and rules,
but also require full interception capability,
meaning systems must be designed
and maintained to assist surveillance agencies
to obtain access to private communications.
This includes the duty
to decrypt communications if the entity
supplied the encryption.
Second, the bill introduces a new enforcement power,
allowing the Secretary of the Ministry
of Business Business Innovation
and Employment MBIE to suspend, revoke, or restrict radio
and spectrum licenses.
That means if an overseas company is unwilling
or unable to comply with our laws in relation
to the consumer codes
or surveillance, their license can be revoked.
If they don't have a New Zealand spectrum license
because they're piggybacking on another,
the secretary can then threaten to revoke that license
unless access to the overseas provider is blocked.
So what does that mean for free speech?
Well, the bill significantly expands the ability
of New Zealand surveillance agencies, New Zealand Police,
N-Z-I-S-G-C-S-B, to access private communications.
New Zealanders will no longer be able
to rely on overseas based networks
or applications, offering greater protection
for private communications.
Provided a warrant is obtained,
New Zealand surveillance agencies will have access
to communications across virtually all platforms
and networks used by New Zealanders.
This is dangerous because private encrypted
communication is essential for journalists protecting, uh,
their sources, whistleblowers, exposing wrongdoing,
individuals organizing politically or speak anonymously,
and members of vulnerable
or marginalized communicating
communities communicating with each other.
These forms of communication are fundamental
to accountability, dissent, and checks on government power.
Not only can they be accessed by surveillance agencies,
but any back doors into encrypted communications will be
abused by criminals.
Not only is the door being opened
for our surveillance agencies,
but is also being opened for anyone else
who can work their way in.
Now, that is just one free speech issue.
Content moderation
and platform governance requirements can easily be added
to these codes and rules,
which will be enforceable against all platforms
and networks, which the Secretary
of MBIE can enforce compliance with by suspending
and revoking licenses.
So what we're looking at is the creation
of a huge censorship tool by this bill,
which will be sitting there just ready to abuse.
And finally, we are a small country faced
with expanded interception, decryption,
and enforcement obligations.
Overseas companies may decide it's just not worth it
and withdraw, withdraw their services from New Zealand
rather than comply.
If that happens, the New Zealanders will lose access
to networks and services that they use for communicating
with people overseas.
Uh, access to diverse sources of information, research
and part participating generally in global intellectual,
cultural and political debate.
This isn't hypothetical.
This has happened and is happening overseas.
Just looking at the bill in the context of the other acts,
in the regime within the regime, the Telecommunications Act,
the Telecommunications Intersection Capability
and Security Act, and the Radio Communications Act, it is,
if it is even technically possible to achieve what it aims
to, it will have significant negative impacts on freedom
of expression in this country.
Now, that is an overview of our submission.
I will now hand it over to Douglas Brown, uh, from our board
to give him the opportunity to speak
and to take the lead in responding to any questions
that the committee may have.
Thank you, Hannah. So the real, uh,
focus that we have, or real concern that we have with this,
uh, comes through with the interception capability
that's being requested here, especially in regards to, uh,
overseas based service providers.
And that's really, uh, where this hammer's home is the fact
that the overseas service providers are almost all, uh,
these days offering what is called end-to-end
encrypted communications.
Governments around the world have been very keen to gain
what they call a backdoor, uh, what is, uh, called in the,
uh, interception Telecom, telecommunications, interception
and Communications Act,
or tsa, uh, an interception capability, uh,
into end-to-end encrypted, uh, communications.
Uh, it is mathematically impossible, and that is
because, uh, when you get a backdoor into something,
it is no longer end-to-end encrypted.
The providers do not hold keys between the devices.
They cannot interrupt the flow of the communication
if there is a way of interrupting that flow
of communication, uh, that is given to a government.
And that is what this bill is even essentially asking
those providers to do.
Uh, it is not just something that the government has.
It is something that any bad actor can discover and crack.
And we know for a fact that, uh, governments are not, uh,
the most advanced people in the room.
Uh, the bad actors, in fact,
are far superior in their ability to find those back doors
and to crack them and to use them.
Uh, we like to think that, uh,
our security services are in fact superior to the, uh,
foreign bad actors.
But that is in fact not the truth.
And we have found, again
and again that government databases themselves, uh,
have been cracked, uh, notwithstanding what is supposed
to be world-leading security.
Uh, the fact is that in regimes, even Western regimes, uh,
where there has been dissent, where there has been, uh,
um, attacks on freedom of expression by those governments,
and we only have to look back five years
to have our own government, uh, describe itself
as being the sole source of truth on a matter.
Uh, it is the fact that things like that
where dissent can be met with, uh, ostracism, uh,
with even, uh, threats of criminal action,
if it goes far enough that the need
for end-to-end encryption, for the need for the ability to
communicate free of others, uh,
or the state spying on you is necessary.
We have had plenty of, uh, um,
what was often called by Eric Crampton, Helen, love, joy,
uh, think of the children.
It's about crime. It's about safety.
But never have we had data, never have we had actual, uh,
information telling us what is necess, why it is necessary.
And finally, the worst part of all of this is the fact
that nobody has been told about this.
This is being, uh, crept through without announcement,
without being told, without, uh, the
providers being notified.
Uh, it's not mentioned in parliament.
It's not being mentioned in the media.
It is simply being placed in there with this capacity.
It may not be activated now,
but it could be activated in the future.
And the government can go to apps like Signal, WhatsApp,
Facebook Messenger, apple Messages,
and say, we have this ability.
Provide us with this interception capacity.
Uh, or we can block your servers. Uh, I'll leave it there.
Okay, great. Thank you. We have just one minute.
Um, so very quickly I would ask, um, uh, is
in the powers of the secretary
to revoke our restrict licenses for non-compliance.
So non-compliance is just not just non-compliance.
It also describes what does that mean?
So the bill talks about the nature
and the extent of the non-compliance,
and there is like list of things
that the secretary will be required
to take into consideration
before they can exercise their power.
Is there something that you think should be added in
that list, Hannah,
Added to the list of things
that the secretary should consider
Before exercising out to revoke for non-compliant?
Well, I, I don't think that's the key issue there,
because having, it's, it's still a very
big power that the secretary has.
So even if they're required to consider certain elements,
they still have the power to do so and justify it.
Yeah. But it's for non-compliance, right?
So, so you're saying that that should not be there at all.
That's what you're saying? Exactly.
We are raising, we're raising our concern with that power
and how significant it is and what effect it has.
Yeah. And that's why I was asking if there was something
you wanted to add to the list, the things
that they should consider before exercising that power.
So no, I get what you have to say.
Thank you so much for your response. Thank you.
Thank you for your submission. Thanks for your contribution.
Thank you very much. Thank
You. Bye.
Uh, next we have fund RNZ
and the Kiwi rocket on Zoom again.
And
Hi.
Hi, how are you? Jay, thank you
so much for your submission.
We have, uh, 10 minutes with you. Thank you.
Thank you very much. So while I can see some
good intentions with this bill,
I cannot support it in its current form.
And one of the reasons is that
end-to-end encryption is very important
for journalism for a start.
There are people who are putting their livelihoods on the
line for stories.
They're putting their safety on the line.
In some cases, sometimes they can't even reveal their
own identities.
And if their security
of their contact details is compromised,
they could cost them a lot.
And we don't wanna make people afraid to come forward
with information about stories that could benefit society
and get justice from people and expose corruption.
So I am very concerned
about the breadth, the breadth of this bill
and the power that the secretary of the Ministry
of Innovation and Employment has over
telecommunication companies and other countries.
Because that's a good place to
companies overseas is a good place to route information
to avoid compromising security and confidentiality.
And I cannot understand why the decision
making is left up to one individual
and not put through the legal system in the courts.
And at least having a committee
and why a secretary, what qualifies a secretary exactly
to make a decision about telecommunication infrastructure
will, it affects so many facets of our society.
A lot of our lives are online now.
People rely on the internet for just about everything.
They rely on the internet to communicate,
to pass on confidential information, to do business,
to have our footprint expanded to the rest of the world
because we're such a small country
and we are quite geographically isolated, that we need
overseas companies to actually be prepared
to do business in New Zealand
and not be afraid to do business in New Zealand
because of the rules
that I think are not written in such a way
that is friendly towards business
and friendly towards journalism.
I think that the whole bill needs a rework.
And a big concern of mine is actually what would happen
if various telecommunication companies
and social media platforms just decided
that doing business in New Zealand was too much trouble.
I note that the Free Speech Union talks about
how small our country is
and how there isn't a lot to be gained for them
and doing business here.
The benefits for us and them coming here
far outweighs the business.
The benefits of them doing business here.
They could just withdraw from New Zealand
and it wouldn't hurt them much,
but it would hurt New Zealand as an awful lot in my opinion.
And we have to talk about the fact that
we have main newstream New Zealand mainstream media in
New Zealand, and we also have alternative media.
And I know there may be mixed feelings about alternative
media, but alternative media is a great leveler in society.
Not just for free speech,
but for getting out information that might be ignored
by the mainstream media initially.
And whether or not to agree with what is being communicated.
Free speech is important.
It's actually a human right as well.
And so we need places where people can go to
express their divergent views.
And some of them may not be popular,
but the wider range of views that are able
to be expressed in society,
the healthier the debate can be in society.
We cannot have a restriction in
information by gatekeepers who have a lot
of power in the mainstream media.
I'm not knocking mainstream media, I think
that does a fantastic job.
But sometimes I've noticed that there's certain information
that doesn't get through on the mainstream media.
It gets through on the alternative media.
And those servers are not in New Zealand.
Those companies are not in New Zealand,
they're in other countries.
And also it connects us to the rest of the world.
We could communicate to the rest of the world.
Now what happens if,
and it's not the case with this government,
but what happens if we did end up
with a corrupt government someday, just suppose we did,
and our only lifeline to communicate to other countries
because a mass censorship was put down on the whole country,
including the mainstream media.
Akin to North Korea is the alternative media.
But the Secretary of the Ministry innovation
and employment thought that they'd breached rules
and decided to cut off either their radio spectrum
or their digital spectrum.
And as far as I can see, there's no redress
for those companies to actually appeal
or even be given full information on why they're being cut
off with the infrastructure in New Zealand.
How would people tell the rest of the world what is wrong?
Because the laws at the moment are pretty good.
But what happens if we get a corrupt government
who brings in all kinds of laws that restricts free speech
to the level of North Korea?
Even the way that people become censored is
by the gradual erosion of free speech,
even unpopular speech.
If you take away people's avenues, you are running the risk
of actually taking away something
that could potentially save people.
A social media blackout
or an internet blackout is an absolute
disaster, in my opinion.
And also add to that, that why is it,
does it not go through the courts?
Why cannot people
and companies overseas
who have breached New Zealand regulations,
which are not set in stone,
it could change at any time with any government.
Why can they not be heard before a magistrate or a jury?
Why can they not actually appeal their case?
Why is it that this one person has
so much power in our country?
It's not good. And I just think
that social media is a great leveler.
I think that alternative media is a great leveler and
and we need that infrastructure
because we don't have enough of it in New Zealand.
'cause we're only 5 million people
and we need to be able to put ourselves out
there to other countries.
And you can't rely on the mainstream media to do that.
They're underfunded. They're under-resourced.
There's only so much that they can do.
There's only so many stories that they can cover.
We actually need as many different media outlets
as possible, even the amateur ones.
So I implore you to look again,
and also I am wondering,
would VPN's virtual private networks be included
in this legislation?
That's a question that I have.
Alright, members, any questions for Joe?
Uh, looks like there are no questions.
Thank you so much, Joe. Um, thank you for your submission.
Thanks for your contribution.
You have a good day. You too. Bye-bye. Thank you.
Uh, next we have New Zealand Outdoors
and Freedom Party. Thank you.
Is it okay if we do a live stream
Of our own Space?
Uh, um, members, uh, they're seeking permission
to do their own live stream.
You need to provide, um, permission for that. Yeah.
So, and is provided for them to do their own live streams,
because we have this going on.
It's just that it's, it's so long that people find it hard
to scroll through to the parts they want. If that's
Helpful, we can send you a timestamp for your submission.
Okay. You, I think that would be good.
We can't do a live stream. No,
That's the committee.
Yes. Committee hasn't given the permission, so yeah. Okay.
Thank you. Uh, so we have 10 minutes with you.
Thank you. Um, I'm Sue Gray, the leader
of the New Zealand Outdoors and Freedom Party.
I specialize in my day job as a human rights
and complex emerging issues lawyer.
Um, and particularly concerned about democracy
and protecting democracy.
With me is Dr. Allison Pavlov chooses an academic in
business and law, and also our candidate
for Wellington Central for the upcoming election.
The New Zealand Outdoors
and Freedom Party is a voice for people, communities,
small business and nature.
We are a voice for fundamental rights and freedoms, ethics
and local decision making.
We're a voice against the globalist agenda.
We are a voice for people, power
and respect for fundamental rights
and freedoms, respect for the New Zealand Bill of Rights
and for our other laws such as privacy laws.
And we are making a submission today.
We largely share the concerns of the free speech union
and actually the previous submitter.
Our concerns are this bill is further erosion
of our fundamental rights, including freedom of expression
and our rights, our protection against
search and surveillance.
And particularly
because not all of the decisions for search
and surveillance would even go before the courts.
The GCSB and the SIS already can do search
and surveillance through their own protocols without
judicial independent overview.
So it's a slippery slope. It's a cumulative effect.
And controlling overseas media is contrary
to the freedom of expression.
What we need to do is look at the hierarchy of laws,
fundamental rights and freedoms.
Part of our constitution should be at the top,
and we should not be making ad hoc law changes that come
undermine those fundamental rights and freedoms.
It's very convenient to make ad hoc law changes,
but it's not constitutional, it's not good government,
and it's not for democracy.
So we focus on our written submission on the privacy issues,
and we, we stand by
what we've put in the written submission.
What we want to talk about more today is our bill
of rights issues and how this bill undermines those rights.
We need to look not only at preserving the rights we've got,
but reclaiming our rights.
So if anything, we would be promoting less interference in
free speech than what we've already got,
rather than extending the telecommunications laws further
to capture overseas organizations.
The free speech union raised a couple of very good points.
One was about whistleblowers.
Now I've been acting for Barry Young, who is a whistleblower
who whistle blew data on the, um, health
New Zealand webpage or not webpage, health New Zealand data.
He has been treated abysmally over 750 days
of being under police bailing conditions while his criminal
processes proceed despite Parliament's law,
the Protected Disclosures Act, which was supposed
to protect whistleblowers,
the current protections are not working.
So again, we need more protection
for whistleblowers if we want
to hold corrupt practices to account.
The second point is, we can't say anymore
that there's no corruption in New Zealand.
We've had the shocking example
of j Mc skimming the Deputy Police Commissioner
and the police conduct resulting in the downfall
of the former police commissioner Andrew Costa.
And the, the shocking findings of the IPCA.
We have to be much more alert to transparency
and to exposing the problems that we have in the system.
We have to protect people coming forward.
We have to give people the ability to communicate
between themselves without state overview.
It's incredibly important in a democratic society.
We've had a discussion
with the previous submitter about the risk of
what if our state turns corrupt.
However, just looking back over the last few years,
we've had so many abuses of our fundamental rights
and freedoms already.
And we've had this, again,
it's been described a single source
of truth from the government.
But the current Prime Minister was going down
that path yesterday talking about there is only a, um,
disinformation, all these things.
Information that the government doesn't like is
not disinformation.
It is a different view from the government view.
And what's really important is
that we can still talk about different views respectfully,
and often people are misinformed.
That's fine if we talk about it.
We can work through these issues if we try
to censor different views.
We have a real problem in terms
of our fundamental freedom rights, our Constitution,
and the democracy of New Zealand.
So we stand at the New Zealand S
and Freedom Party for the people of New Zealand,
not the globalists, not other, other international agendas.
We stand for the people having their fundamental rights
for principled law reform
that is always looking in the context
of freedom freedom's first
and whether changes are beneficial to the future
of the people, to our children, our grandchildren,
and future generations.
Let's not have these ad hoc secret changes sneak
through over the Christmas holiday break, hoping
that nobody will even notice 'em.
Let's be transparent.
Let's be a government that we can all be proud of with laws
that we can all be proud of so
that New Zealand can be an example
of the best practice for the world.
Not some hidden agendas going on
that people don't understand.
If we've still got time, Alison's got a
couple more points to make too.
Yeah, I'd just like to, um, say that I've listened
to the Free speech Union and Joe, was it Reed?
Um, and now Sue.
And I'm actually just really shocked that we are having
to sit here and protect a fundamental right
to have personal communications.
What what this bill does is it's prioritizing.
And indeed previously legislation is prioritizing opaque
state run organizations over,
over New Zealanders.
We we don't have to justify with a list
why we should have com personal communication.
Of course we should. It's, it's, we should,
it's a fundamental right that we are born
and we should be able to have private communications
with other people without having to justify it
and certainly without state oversight.
So that's all I'd like to say on that.
Um, any questions? Members? There are no questions.
Thank you so much for your submission. Thank you very much.
And next we have protected, uh, individual life,
liberty, and rights. Thank you so much.
Hi.
Hello. Thank you. Hello. We have 10 minutes with you.
Perfect. Thank you. So my name's Nathan.
I'm the executive director of Pillar,
and this is my colleague Arian.
We are here today to submit, uh, to this bill.
We have read through it.
We have a few questions and queries
and some amendments that we would like to see.
We don't support the bill in its current state,
and we would love to share with you why,
and also receive some questions as to
how it may or may not be improved.
I'll hand it back. Irene, thank you so much. Yeah.
As Na Nathan said, uh, we, we are generally in support
of updating New Zealand's
telecommunications regulatory framework.
Uh, but there's just specific provisions within the Bill's
current format, which we believe, uh, pose threats to, uh,
privacy, uh, freedom of, uh, of expression,
and also, uh, uh, fail in areas around, uh, just principle,
uh, around limiting powers
that are vested in one individual.
Uh, and so we'd like to just address those,
uh, to you today.
Uh, first on the issue of, uh, giving significant authority
to one person and failing to put in place, uh,
the appropriate checks and balances, as has been noted by,
uh, previous submitters, uh, the Secretary of mb, uh,
under the newly proposed part seven A, uh,
is given significant authority to, uh, restrict
or revoke, uh, or,
or simply remove a, a access to the New Zealand market
for certain, uh, providers or, or services.
Um, and this is probably seen in section 65, E, f,
and G, uh, under these provisions, the secretary only needs,
uh, an assurance, and that's a quote from, uh, the,
the bill, uh, that the other agencies, uh,
that are making the request to, uh,
the secretary are doing it in good faith, essentially.
Uh, and, and they've done their due diligence.
And that requests are essentially, uh, yeah, as I say, in,
in good faith, uh, there's, there's no real checks
or balances in place.
Uh, no objective thresholds, uh, for her to consider
before she takes, takes that power.
Uh, and so this lack of clarity we think is, is significant
and, and we believe it should be addressed,
and we should, uh, have in place as a matter of principle,
uh, a good checks and balances, uh, to, to the authority
that's, that's given to her.
Uh, there's two reasons for that.
One in particular is just around, uh,
trust in our public institutions, uh, uh,
and if, if there is a perception, uh, that she
or he, uh, as a secretary is exercising her, her
essentially penal powers, uh, uh, as granted
by the government in a way that is unfair, uh, that can, uh,
create a, a relatively, uh, uh, we would suggest negative,
uh, impact on, on the trust in the institutions
that are involved, uh, mb as well as the security,
uh, uh, agencies.
And so we, we believe that this should be addressed.
Uh, now on the issue of speech, uh, you've heard, uh, from,
uh, multiple submitters on that.
Uh, we think that the, the failure to, to put in place, uh,
measures that, that regulate the, the power, uh, o
of the secretary would also threaten
speech, uh, and in two ways.
Um, firstly, it creates a higher risk operating environment,
uh, for these network providers in New Zealand.
Uh, because, well, you have one person who has lots
of authority, uh, uh,
and the risk that they would lose their access, uh, to the,
to New Zealand market is relatively higher.
Uh, and we believe that given New Zealand is a smaller
market, uh, and would
therefore also reduce, uh, produce lower returns
for these providers, uh, or services.
Uh, having a, a high risk operating environment
for them means they might be more willing to, to pull out
of this, uh, this country, uh,
and reduce New Zealand's ability to freely
and frankly communicate and transfer information.
Uh, as well as this, uh, I think it would be very important
for the committee, and as we progress with this bill
to address any concerns around, uh, free speech.
Because even if the bill technically doesn't, uh, allow
the government access to encrypted material, uh,
with the whole point of end-to-end tion is
that no one can access it.
Uh, even if that's the case, uh, just the thought
of surveillance taking place, uh,
can have a chilling effect, uh, on speech, uh, even, uh,
and, and there's, you know, European jurisprudence and, and,
and precedent set on that, that, uh, even the thought
of surveillance, uh, can, can suppress speech, uh, which is
what we call the, the chilling effect.
And so we, we really believe that this should be addressed,
uh, just in the communications that,
that are being practiced, uh, throughout, throughout this,
uh, the passing of this legislation.
Uh, and then, uh, finally, just on the issue of privacy, uh,
one of the issues that we work across is around privacy.
I do note that, uh, under six section 65, I, uh,
there are protections for personal
and private information, uh, which is good.
We believe that, uh, that section does, uh, give, uh, uh,
essentially information sharing between, uh,
different, uh, agencies.
Uh, we believe that there should also be a clause in there
for data minimization that only information that is required
for the carrying out of the tasks
of the secretary are passed along, not any
and every piece of information.
Uh, so, and that is particularly, uh, uh,
relevant given the, the metadata that would be extracted,
uh, from, you know, any warrants that are issued, uh, uh,
uh, an interception that takes place.
Uh, so those are, are our key concerns around
institutional trust.
Uh, trust in our, you know, uh, in the public, in, in, in,
in these institutions, uh, around free speech,
the chilling effect and, and privacy.
And so, all in all, we, we do believe that there is, uh,
an appropriate time and place to,
to update regulatory frameworks for, uh, you know,
uh, telecommunications.
Uh, but we hope that this is done with due diligence
and caution, uh, and vigilance
and consideration for the foundational rights, uh, of,
of New Zealanders, which don't disappear overnight, uh,
but slowly instead, we can erode if we are not vigilant.
And so with that, uh, we are happy to take questions.
Thank you so much. And there is a question
from Dr. David Wilson. Yeah,
I enjoyed your, um,
and your surveillance really over the right
to privacy versus some of the issues around
that in particular, so the right to know
and the public interest, what's actually being talked about.
So there's a balancing act there.
So think about if you want
to preserve end-to-end encryption, full stop,
that also leads to, uh, bad actors of a different kind, such
as organized crime groups,
pornography, et cetera, et cetera.
So I'm really interested in the way that you, uh, started
to talk about what are the
levels mitigations against which information
such an organization, whether it's one person in MV
or maybe a group or a panel
or whatever, what
that might look like from your perspective.
So could you be, I
was a bit more clear with that question,
Made a statement around, uh, there are only certain levels
of, of information that should be able to be,
Uh, oh, on the pri on the privacy issue.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, well, I think it'll just be a case
by case basis in terms of,
obviously we've got our security agencies
that are carrying out their tasks.
Yeah. Um, and intercepting based on the information and,
and the warrant, the, the, the criteria
for getting a warrant.
Uh, and so I, I I, I do think it's a case by case basis, um,
when, uh, you know, in the legislation as it is, uh,
only information that is required can be ex extracted.
Um, and so that, that is a positive,
uh, kind of clause in there.
But for the carrying out of, uh, the role
of the secretary, not all
that information may necessarily be needed
to be transferred, if that makes sense.
Yeah. So are you, are you sort of, um, prodding
for greater governance around
what information is actually attainable? Sure.
More clarity on what the, exactly what,
what exactly is required to clear, clear thresholds and,
and greater checks and balances to ensure
that an unelected bureaucrat, such as the secretary of MB,
wouldn't be imbued with power such
that they could ideologically, uh,
apply their role where they see fit.
Thank you. Okay. Great.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Thank you. Thanks Ion.
Thank you. Uh, we move on to next,
that is sponsor me chapters by Zoom.
Um, they're not Nick here, um,
but we do have another later on who we
online, which is Yes.
If we can,
I think she might not be ready, so, um,
perhaps you could take a short break.
Yeah. We are running a bit ahead,
so I think it would be good to see, um, call a couple
of the submitters
and those who are next to see who's ready yet.
So members, we have a break for just two minutes,
two minutes
into public session.
Um, and this is on Zoom,
just waiting for a, uh, David to come online.
Sure.
I was just signed in for an hour at some stage. Okay.
I said I would do an hour,
how many of us are on this committee? Ruben,
Get this three, but at 1130 for half an hour?
Well, maybe. I'm, I'm here from 11
till 12, as far as I know.
Yep. So I'll just be here from 11 till 12. It's, I just,
Yeah. 12
To do
On, looks like it's working.
Yes, we can see you now. Uh, can you hear me?
Um, are you talking to me? Yes.
Oh, we're starting now. Oh, sorry, my thing said, uh,
um, 1115, so
Yes, yes. No, thank you for
becoming, um, okay, no worries.
A bit earlier. So we have 10 minutes with you.
Yeah. Okay. Uh, sorry. I'll just keep my, um, oration out.
Awesome. Oh, cool. Oh, cool.
So, uh, my name is Dan Gda Harbin.
Um, I'm the deputy leader of Dr.
VNZ, and I'm just here to speak on behalf of RTV.
We're just a political party that, um, that's committed
to freedom, accountability, transparency, and government.
We, uh, we believe in first principle's policy,
personal respons, personal responsibility,
and clear constitutional boundaries.
Um, so today, um, we appear mostly
in opposition to the telecommunications and other matters.
Bill, just as it stands right now,
or hence what the bill, so I'm just gonna it brief.
I'll just address the three most
significant concerns that we have.
So the first thing is the whole idea of the court oversight
and how it's being considered like, um,
imp practicable in some cases.
So currently under the telecommunication, oh, well,
texta, serious non-compliance is addressed
through enforcement notice under section 90, followed
by an application to the high court under section 91
for compliance for penalty orders, which currently,
this is this current, which only the court may grant.
And this structure is deliberate and, um,
and ensures that when enforcement reaches such a serious
stage that decisions are made by an independent court
and all legal standards are applied and blah, blah, blah.
You know, I'm subject to appeal and all that.
So our concern is that the parallel enforcement pathway,
which is, um, would be created under created, um, uh,
by seven A with the new, um, bill, is
that it somewhat treats it as like an obstacle.
It treats all of these statutory things as
like obstacles.
It's like, obviously the bill isn't saying
that the court enforcement is unavailable
or ineffective, it's just saying that it's
not always the most practical thing to do.
So we fully understand the policy drivers.
I mean, certainly in, in like today's age with the internet,
it's a lot, you know, speed
and flexibility is, needs to be concerned and,
and taken into account, but these aren't totally new things.
Um, I mean, when texter came through,
the internet was already kind of booming.
Then I, I suppose with ai it's a lot more prevalent now,
but I think well, um,
we think the bill goes a bit further than just streamlining
the framework, but tries to actually bypass it.
And, um, evidential standards, it depends on the court.
There aren't obstacles.
These are actually really important safeguards.
Um, a judicial review
after the fact is not really an equivalent substitute
for prior, um, authorization,
in particular when it's like a
permanent service restriction.
So our concern really with this first point is that, um,
if speed is the concern, then
it should be looking at maybe expediting judicial process,
not just cutting the court out.
Um, the second point is the, um,
the permanent service disruption.
Um, the second concern follows directly from the first is
that under part seven A,
the secretary's powers do not operate only against
the noncompliant provider itself.
The new section created, well, section 65 F created
by the bill allows the secretary
to permanently restrict the service.
Um, and in practical terms,
this means enforcement can be affected
by compelling third parties
and intermediaries to act as enforcement agents.
Um, even though they are not themselves in breach,
and it's not a temporary
or, um, interim power, the statute expressly
contemplates permanent restriction.
Right. The concern here is the collateral impact.
Um, a decision taken without prior judicial oversight can
result in the long-term disruption of services to customers.
And it's all about our market, um, appeal, um,
obligations imposed on innocent license holders.
It's kind of just
something that we are a bit concerned about.
It's, again, our concern is not the state that the, um,
not that the state has tools
to address serious noncompliance,
but the permanent service effecting outcomes can now
be achieved through third parties.
And we, uh, I suppose we're just really concerned about
safeguards, ensuring that everything
follows our quick procedure.
Uh, the last point we'll make is that, is the fact
that decisions, um, can be made on summary information alone
without, um, adversarial testing.
Uh, the third concern is the adequacy of the safeguards, uh,
that accompany these powers.
Because under the, um, new sec, uh,
section 60 5G, I believe, uh,
before exercising the power to revoke
or permanently restrict license rights,
secretary may consider the required matters
by relying solely on summary information
provided by a surveillance agency
or the comments commission.
There's no requirement, um, for the information
to be tested in an adversarial process
and independently verified or assessed by a court
before permanent consequences are imposed.
I suppose with summary information, we are just concerned
that we're not concerned about bad faith.
Okay? We try, look, we don't play those games.
We always assume good faith,
but it does not mean that it's not a substitute
for an evidence tested, thorough independent process,
particularly where the outcome may be a permanent service
restriction or indirect enforcement through a third party.
Um, when this ability, ability
to rely on summary information is combined
with executive decision making
and permanent license impacts the results is a concentration
of power with limited procedural counterweights
judicial review after the fact.
Again, it doesn't, I mean, I get it, you want
to have it like after the fact
to make sure everything's all good,
but it's, it's just not the same thing.
Um, our review tends to focus more on the legality
of everything, not so much the merits.
Well, it's the, and, um, in our view
and occurs only, um, only
after the disruption will take place.
Um, and it's just our concern being that the severity,
it's just being coupled with the safeguards.
It's just we feel like the courts
and we want the committee to really take into account
that actually these aren't just obstacles.
And I suppose taken together these provisions
shift serious enforcement away from court supervision,
allow permanent service disruption through third parties,
and permit those outcomes
to be decided on summary information alone,
which is our main concern, at least from what we've read
so far, that combination warrants a higher statutory
threshold and strongest safeguards in the
bill presently provides.
So just for these reasons, uh, well, there's a, a few more,
but just for those primary ones, we don't support, um,
the bill in this current form,
we fully acknowledge the importance
of effective national security and regulatory enforcement.
And with ai, like we understand, especially
with ai, um, generated content, um,
that things are being created at a much higher speed
and things are being generated at a, you know,
people in the mainstream, well actually, um,
I suppose even young people are just sick of AI now.
Um, you know,
and definitely with harmful AI content, um,
if this bill can do something about that.
But we still believe that there needs
to be some court supervision.
Um, permanent service reduction is a massive step to take,
um, and needs to be evidence-based.
Um, if Parliament wishes to confer power to the severity,
they should be accompanied by highest statutory thresholds
and default, uh, judicial oversight.
We ly uh, uh, we
therefore recommend that the bill be amended, uh,
to restore those safeguards before it proceeds further.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. Um, that's good.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Okay, thank you. Um, are there
any questions or are we all good?
No. Okay. Thank you so much guys. You have a good one.
Sorry. Yeah, thank you so much. Yeah.
Okay. Yeah, welcome.
So members, we move to Chris Newman.
Are they online? Yeah, online.
So, so just waiting for him to come online.
Chris. Hello. Good morning.
Hi there. Thank you so much.
My room. So here we are. Um, can, how's that?
Are you getting a clear image?
Yes, we can see you and we can hear you too.
And thank you for becoming, um, available earlier.
So we have five minutes with you.
Sure. Thank you.
Um, right, so let's get started.
The, now I've,
I've read the New Zealand Telecoms Forum submission,
and I find that that
that covers all the key points on the technical side that,
that were of concern to me.
On the policy side.
Um, we have a, we have some issues about, uh,
I guess vexatious outcomes that frequently arise from pieces
of well-intended legislation.
For example, the Resource Management Act has impinged
and has inhibited an awful lot of development.
And, uh, these inhibitory outcomes
of well-intended legislation are almost impossible for us
to address once they get passed through parliament.
Um, and it becomes a burden around everybody's neck.
We have no way to correct policy or statutory errors
or unintended consequences.
And this is often the result of well meant, uh, legislation.
So we are losing our freedom all the time
as the encroachment of bureaucracy
and, uh,
policies which are not very helpful to the people.
So, um, this thing seemed to be back to front,
and that is our concern that the, uh, we are being driven
by legislation rather than legislation
serving our interests.
And this is the core that goes back to the core of, of all
of, uh, communications, including Jelly Communications.
So my concern is that how much redress are we going to have
the people to direct parliament
and guide you people when you start, when this sort
of legislation gets through?
And, uh, we can't modify or adjust it
or retune it quickly as it's implemented.
We can't always get everything lined up at the beginning
because when you pass legislation,
then it changes in the real world from all the talk
that we do before it,
before, you know, in the, in the, in the lead up,
and this is our concern, is, uh, policy
and reality are not very closely aligned.
Um, we have a burden of complicated legislation,
for example, health and safety has, has created a lot
of problems out there.
Um, immigration policies well
intended, but it's not working.
It's, uh, easy for people to violate those rules
and, uh, they're not being administered properly.
And I suspect that this sort of, uh, telecoms idea,
this whole idea
that we are discussing now will also fall
into the same category.
So without the ongoing evaluation, it's very difficult
for anybody to support legislation,
which is well intended often,
but has, uh, harmful consequences
and unintended consequences.
Sometimes it might be even beneficial, but
unless you know afterwards
and have a means of addressing it, uh, we,
we are in a process which is like,
but like trying to stop a steam train, a big train,
once it gets going down the tracks,
you know, we're all at the station.
We are talking about the legislation
and how it suits us and so on.
But once it leaves the station,
it's a whole different creature.
It's now moving and, uh, it's very hard to adjust it.
So this is the, the at the root of these sort
of well meant intentions that frequently
turn into nightmares for us.
Um, any attempt to touch freedom
of speech always creates a very, um, uh,
big flag for us out here in the, uh,
in the general community.
So this is at the base of my concern that the, uh,
existing intentions may be well thought through
and intended, but mm, how much of our work, our, our,
our submission is taken on board, we get the feeling
that this is a rubber stamp rather than a, um, a sincere,
um, um, adjustment, you know, attempt to adjust legislation.
So that's pretty much my point. The unintended consequences.
We don't have a, we should have an active unintended
consequences that enables us to quickly adjust, um,
matters which get out of control very quickly.
And whenever you go near freedom of speech, which is
where this is going close to, um, we start
to get very concerned.
That's my basic point. I should stop there. I guess.
Uh, how are we doing for time?
Uh, we have actually, uh, just, um, done five minutes.
Uh, Chris would, let me just, um, say this,
that it's not our rubber stamp,
the select committees made up
of members from various parties in parliament,
and we are sitting here and listening to all the submitters.
Yeah. And then from there is a process
where we analyze what submitters say.
So thank you so much for your contribution. Thank you.
Sure. Okay. Bye-bye.
Bye.
Yes. Yeah. Okay,
good morning.
Good morning. Uh, we have, um, Ken, you online?
Yes, I'm, thank you so much. We have 10 minutes with you.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, thank you for allowing me
to address my concerns about this bill.
I'm opposed to the telecommunications
and other matters amendment bill in its current form.
This is quite a technical bill
and it has serious implications for both
free speech and privacy.
The bill mentions surveillance agency eight times,
and it appears to be a major concern within this bill
to expand the surveillance of Kiwis,
the bill makes offshore providers
who currently provide encryption communication services
subject to full interception capability
and network security duties, including the duty
to decrypt communications if the entity
supplied the encryption.
That raises serious questions about whether genuine private
communication would remain available in New Zealand at all.
Encryption is a tool designed
to help internet users keep their online data
and communications private and secure,
and make sure private messages stay private.
It is essential for protecting freedom of expression
and privacy for some communities like human rights
offenders, advocacy groups, community organizers
and humanitarian actors, encryption is especially crucial
and should be used with other more conventional privacy
protection tools to keep people safe both online
and in their everyday lives.
Just why does the government need to read or listen into
or private correspondence and communication between Kiwis?
It's a good question. This government has consistently
sought to uphold the rights and freedoms of New Zealanders,
and I was thankful for the Prime Minister's comments
to India's prime minister when he said, we want people
to have access to free speech.
It's a very important part of a liberal democracy,
and people have the complete right to free speech
and to protest, and they need to do so lawfully.
These comments seem to be at odd
with the unstated intention of this bill.
Although the word encryption is not mentioned in the bill,
it's directly under attack.
Encryption is key
to preserving confidentially confidentiality
and unknown amenity in our online communications, and is
therefore essential for the enjoyment of a range
of human rights and its latest resolution on privacy.
In the digital age,
the UN Human Rights Council stress the importance
of encryption pseudo nom,
and to ensure in particular, the enjoyment of the rights
to privacy, to freedom of opinion and expression,
and to freedom of peaceful assembly and association.
In an excellent article entitled Encryption,
it's not about good and bad guys, it's about all of us.
The author delineated the pros
and cons of removing encryption
and stated, the modern debate over encryption has focused on
combating child sexual abuse and terrorism.
These are worthy causes
and it's important that law enforcement has the tools it
needs to investigate them,
but it is also clear that providing them with some
of the tools they ask for or to degrade
or break encryption risks significant social costs.
Encryption is a technology that we rely on as a society
to protect our data.
The do not justify the means when we talk about
undermining encryption and security.
Many governments are demanding a backdoor into the
encryption algorithm that they can exploit.
Encryption. Back doors are designed weaknesses
or access points and encryption algorithms.
They allow parties, typically government agencies
or law enforcement to bypass encryption
and access encrypted data without the knowledge
or consent of the data's owner.
And potentially without the knowledge
of the company providing the service
or device for its supporters.
Back doors offer an appealing approach, allowing services
and data to remain encrypted while ensuring law enforcement
and other good actors access needed information.
Unfortunately, anyone can use vulnerabilities in the
encryption algorithm with the back door,
whether they're the people who created them, the people
who are supposed to use them,
or the bad actors seeking to exploit the vulnerability.
Once intentional back doors are injected into algorithms,
other actors can exploit the two and no one would know.
In addition, front doors are as vulnerable to misuse
and exploitation as back doors.
In addition, by forcing technology companies
to use weakened encryption, anti
encryption mandates also risk stifling
cybersecurity innovation, leaving industries
and individuals vulnerable in the long term
targeted interception can easily slip into
ubiquitous surveillance.
Effective investigation does not require
compromising encryption.
There are many less harmful ways to support law enforcement
and national security interests.
Another author stated law enforcement
and intelligence agencies are increasingly asking
for encryption back doors to intercept
or access encrypted communications
to help catch the bad guys themselves
or order companies to do it for them.
This not only weakens the global internet infrastructure,
it also puts the lives
of human rights defenders at greater risk of harm.
Because this bill is classified as urgent,
it will not have the customer period of debate.
Encryption is essential, privacy,
security, and pre-ex expression.
Any changes affecting these issues
require far greater public scrutiny than this.
Bill allows for. Freedom
of speech is a fundamental right guarantee to citizens
to express their opinions
and dissenting point of view without censor
or fear from anyone.
My ultimate concern with this bill is that, um,
religious freedom is not a given in many parts of the world.
World. According to Pew Research Center,
government pressure on religious life remains widespread
In 2022 governments, governments harassed religious groups
and 186 out of 198 countries.
That's 94% of all countries in the world were harassed
by their governments and interfered
and worshiped in 170 countries.
Christians are by far the largest group in the world
who are routinely persecuted, restricted,
or discriminated against safe houses.
Together with secure communications offered
by various Christian ministries provide the only way
that they can support these individuals
to find some peace in the midst of ongoing violence.
There is a major chain of vulnerable lives
that will be impacted if a chain in that link is exposed
to their, you might say, well,
our government would not pass on such information that
if it was known, that might currently be true.
However, employees of the government are not immune
to either talk compromise, bribery, or deceit.
I read a novel where ISIS members infiltrated the American
NSA and passed on valuable intelligence
to undermine US national security interests.
This is not farfetched
as the government surveillance agency will expand
as a result of all the decryption work that will result.
If this bill passes, then a ra diverse range
of employees will be employed, and it will not be long
before the whereabouts
of persecuted Christians will be discreetly discovered
and relayed to their enemies.
Please carefully consider the implications of this bill
for those who really need your protection.
As expected, the severity of the laws against Christians
and the punishments for breaking them vary by country.
In most cases, it means Christians cannot gather
to worship together and futures,
nor can they publicly express their faith
that Jesus Christ died as an atoning sacrifice
covering their sins with his holy, sinless blood
and rose again bodily on the third day, so that all
who put their trust in him by faith alone, by grace alone
and Christ alone, will receive the gift of eternal life.
Persecution also frankly, means that simply owning a Bible
or talking about Christianity, even
among family members in the privacy of one's own home,
can result in imprisonment or death.
As you might know, Christians in Pakistan,
Stan are considered second class blasphemy laws
that forbid any insult to the Muslim prophet Muhammad
or the Koran are frequently used to justify the mis
of Christians ranging from the denial
of humanitarian aid to mob violence.
Christian girls and women are also frequent targets
of kidnappings, forced marriages and forced conversions.
Like many other Islamic countries that follow Sharia,
Christians face harassment
and persecution by the government,
their non-Christian neighbors and even their own families.
Additionally, if a Muslim can to Christianity,
that person can face or even death.
Persecution of Christians is growing in India
and many other countries around the world.
Therefore, it's imperative to understand
that many people could die if communications
are made insecure.
This bill must be revised in order to save lives.
In closing, I urge the committee to adopt the RESO
resolutions and recommendations the free speech Union
proposed in their submission to parliament.
We need to cherish, preserve,
and protect our freedoms, not undermine them.
Our forefathers fought for them list, we forget
they were purchased dearly
and must not be given away lightly.
Thank you for your attention to this matter.
Do you have any questions?
Uh, we don't have much time left for any questions.
Uh, thank you so much for your submission. Thanks.
You're welcome. Have a good day.
You too. Uh, next do we have seven, four skills?
Great. Yes, please come forward.
Is that Rebecca Jacob? It is.
Thank you Rebecca for your submission.
We have 10 minutes with you. Thank you. No problem.
Thank you for the opportunity to come in
and talk, um, to the committee.
We appreciate that. Um, for context,
I'm obviously general counsel of Southern Cross.
I'm assuming people don't
necessarily know much about the company.
Um, okay. So we're the, um,
fiber optic subsea cable operator.
Um, we land in the 13 locations globally,
um, across six countries.
So we are one of the main con uh, connectivity, um,
infrastructure providers for New Zealand.
Um, so I guess to to say we do support the purpose
of the bill, um, and the context
and the reason that we are here is that
we are a purely international operator.
Um, we don't provide any services
to end users in New Zealand.
Um, we sell to operators who do, uh, utilize our service
as part of the provision of services in New Zealand,
but we ourselves don't, um, have any end users.
So we feel that the bill currently,
as it's currently proposed, gives some unintentional, um,
ambiguity around the fact that international services are,
um, picked up under the liable person's definition.
Um, the reason that we are focused on this is that, um,
in 2025, the Commerce Commission did change
their approach to us.
Um, and they did find that we were a liable person, um,
for the purposes of the, um, TDL, the telecommunications,
um, development levy.
That was a change
and we didn't support, um, their interpretation,
but, um, we collaborate, um, with all our regulators.
So therefore we, we did, um, uh,
without prejudice accept their position.
But this bill was an opportunity for us to hopefully, uh,
remedy that, um, incorrect interpretation.
Um, from our, from our end, it imposes administrative
and compliance cost.
That to us just do not make any sense.
Um, there is, uh, the, the purpose
of the TDL is not met
by capturing companies like ourselves, um, in our opinion.
So, um, it is creating regulatory uncertainty.
Um, and for critical infrastructure like sub C, it is,
that is a crucial element when people are selecting landing
points and when they decide whether
or not they're going to bother landing in the country.
Uh, the reality for New Zealand is
that we only get branching units nowadays.
Um, we are not a key market for subsea.
So it is a factor having regulatory uncertainty about this
and dragging international companies, um, into a domestic.
What is fundamentally a domestic regulatory issue, um,
is not a desirable outcome in our view.
Uh, satellite operators,
however, uh, fundamentally different, which, um,
we understand that the purpose of the ACT is trying
to address the concern there.
They provide direct to consumer broadband services.
They are the correct focus of the scope
of this expanded bill.
Um, and the TDL is about benefiting those
who directly benefit from New Zealand consumers.
Um, so we understand the intent, um, behind the change,
but a satellite provider provides up down link services
which go directly to the end user.
The origination and termination points are the end users
residents in, in New Zealand.
The entire service is provided for end users in New Zealand.
Um, in the case of our services, we provide an on-ramp
to an international service.
Um, we do not have any
termination domestically in New Zealand.
Um, we are simply an on-ramp to our service, um, as we are,
uh, for lots of different services including broadband.
Um, so what we are looking for is a simple clarification
to the definition of liable person, um, to confirm that it,
it is about, doesn't include international services
provided, um, to people
who are not end users in New Zealand.
We, we went through many iterations of,
and our submission about
what would be the best, uh, amendment.
Um, and that's where we landed as the only way
that would be, you know, give enough clarity,
um, to the commerce commission.
Um, that actually that we are not supposed
to be being picked up in terms of the policy intent.
Um, all of our, everyone that we provide an on-ramp to
are caught by the TDL, um,
and they are paying, um, their share of the levy.
So from a policy perspective, there's no gap created
by us not being part of the regime.
Um, and we believe that
what we're proposing aligns with what you're trying
to capture, which is the overseas providers in New Zealand
providing New Zealand services.
Um, so, uh, I do want to clarify that we are not proposing
that we are exempt from regulation in New Zealand
and we are certainly not proposing that we're not a network
operator for the purposes of the bill.
Um, we're not suggesting any amendment
that would affect that at all.
We understand that we are a network operator and
therefore we have oversight under the act.
That's not a concern.
Um, and that has been the case
for the last 25 years of our operation.
Um, it's the fact that this new overlay, which is to us, um,
not in line with the policy.
So thanks. Great. Thanks. Why are we here?
Um, first question from Marina,
Um, just on the difference between if you were exempted,
um, just as yourselves
or the class of, um, others
who might at some time provide the service.
Yeah. You wouldn't expect any new ones, eh,
because of the way that satellites have changed the market,
you would expect the existing providers to be the providers.
Uh, correct. Yeah. Yeah.
And so, um, if you, if,
if the committee was interested in pursuing, um,
more guidance around the exemption
that you had from the Well no,
you never had an exemption from the Commerce commission.
Oh, so the Commerce Commission has always,
so we had correspondence
with them when the levy was first introduced.
Yeah. And they agreed with us that we were
outside of the regime. Okay.
And they didn't give you an
exemption then? They just agreed that
They agreed that we were outside of the scope.
Correct. Whereas this, uh, in 2025, um, they came to us
and said that they had had direction, um,
obviously it was aimed at the satellite providers,
but they had had direction, the international services were
to be included. Um, that makes
Sense. How much is
the, um, how do they calculate your
levy given that you don't have any?
It was extremely difficult process
and it cost, one of the administrative burdens
for us was it cost us a lot with p WC to work through that
with them because we don't have New Zealand revenue.
Um, and so we went through, we have intercompany, uh,
'cause we have a New Zealand company.
So we went through the, uh, uh, PWC, um,
audited and, uh, originally created, um, inter companies
that we worked for through all of our 13 companies, um,
throughout the globe.
And they agreed they had to get a, um,
exemption from the telecommunications.
Um, oh. So they commission saying that
actually we don't fit the square box
and we, you know, they're trying
to ram a into the round hole. Can you share
Us how much, um, Levy, uh, US dollars?
It was around 12,000. Okay,
Thank you. What,
um, so, um,
and that is our other problem is we account in USD.
So we had to have, we had to, uh, work through
how we were gonna convert that
and how the Commerce Commission would be happy
with the exchange rate where you replied, et cetera.
It was administratively heavy for a very small, um, fee.
Mm-hmm. Uh, or no question. Okay. Dr. David Wilson, uh,
In New Zealand Domicile
Company, say, uh, we have a subsidiary here, which is, um,
uh, SCCL, New Zealand Limited, which is a New Zealand, um,
incorporated company, um, that is one
of our 13 companies globally,
and that provides our New Zealand landing service.
So we have the on ramp for your cable station. Yep.
And our, uh, that actual cable station is owned
by Spark New Zealand Limited,
and we, that Cab Con cable is contracted
by the New Zealand subsidiary.
Yeah. So, uh, so one leaning station,
Uh oh, sorry. Well, well,
uh, we actually landed twice,
but we're Spark in both cases. Yeah.
And um, so your clients own five repair within No.
The sub cables? No. No.
Southern Cross owns all five pairs.
Okay. And rents them.
So who are your clients? No, um, we sell, um,
what's called IUs inable Right.
To use. Yep. So, um, the actual, uh,
five pairs, each
of our cables has a different five pair configuration,
but the, um, only product we currently sell is a right
to use, which is like a lease. Right.
It's, so You own typically not from an accounting
perspective, but it's a lease in layman
Terms, and they land on land
and they connect to the terrestrial network
that we have here in New Zealand, correct, yeah.
Which is all owned by all the other companies.
Correct. Who will, who will pay the TDL? Yeah. So
You're an infrastructure supplier.
Yeah, we're, we're, we think of ourselves as layer zero.
Yeah. We are literally a pipe. Yeah. Um, sub C. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Thank
You so much for your submission.
No problem. Have a good day. Thank you. Thank you.
The next submission not,
And we would reach it one, um, okay,
we're running about two minutes.
Two minutes. Yeah, it's not much though.
So, um, I think members, we will just be patient and mm-hmm.
Another couple of minutes.
Oh, question list came out.
So we have Dr, um, Andrew Shelley with us. Mm-hmm.
Zoom on Zoom I think
should be coming on Zoom,
just, oh, um, Dr.
Shelley, are you there online? Oh, okay.
Should be there now. Dr. Shelley. I, yes,
Yes, there we go. Sorry,
that, um, that changed as I was, uh,
changed from an attendee to a panelist.
No, you, you look good and we can hear you as well.
So we have five minutes with you. Thank you.
Great. Thank you. Uh, so you've obviously read my
submission and there was three parts to it.
The first part covered things like, um, privacy
and security of digital infrastructure
that will have been covered by other submitters.
So I don't wanna talk to that.
Uh, second part was the economic issues, which I think, uh,
probably deserves a, a little bit of focus.
And, and I think you have to be mindful here
of unintended consequences in telecom's, uh, regulation.
So, um, first example I'll give there is when
we went through the, the unbundling of telecom's network,
local loop unbundling,
Telstra Clear had been investing in a fiber network, uh,
particularly around urban areas.
Uh, and as local loop UNB bundling was announced, uh,
Telstra Clear decided to stop investing in that network.
Um, that was an unintended consequence
of, of the regulation.
Yes, we got retail competition,
but we didn't have competition in the network provision.
Second case that I'll give you is around mobile
coverage in New Zealand.
We've had this big push to move to 5G
and that push to move to 5G has resulted in poorer
and poorer coverage around more
and more of New Zealand as just a, a consequence of the,
the frequency issues.
Uh, so for example, I
until recently lived in a subdivision just out of, uh,
fielding called Mount Taylor.
Um, that's a fairly high income subdivision
and it was terribly served by mobile coverage
because everyone's gone to 5G.
Uh, the three G's disappearing.
Uh, we've got competition in mobile spark one NZ,
two degrees, um, but the coverage up there was atrocious.
You'd have to find the right spot on your property to stand,
to be able to hold a phone call
driving the 20 kilometers from fielding to Palmers North.
There's black spots. You can't hold a,
a phone call anymore when you are driving that distance.
So that's, that's, that's one of the things that happens.
So when we are thinking about levying
and imposing conditions on satellite broadband providers,
I'd suggest that you need to think very,
very carefully about that They are providing the service
that's missing in these poor coverage areas.
Uh, they're already providing that service.
So levying them is about taxing them
to subsidize their New Zealand terrestrial competitors
to provide a service that's not being provided very well.
So be aware of that.
Um, they're already providing that, that alternative
and then think about how are you actually gonna be able
to effectively enforce these regulations.
You know, I included a copy of
that tweet in my submission from Iran,
but that's literally the only ways that you can enforce.
If they won't pay, you either have to jam the signal
or confiscate satellite terminals.
So think about whether that actually makes sense.
Okay. Uh, members, any questions?
It looks like there are no questions.
Thank you so much Dr. Shelly, for your submission.
Great, thank you very much. Have a good day. Bye-bye.
Um, we sound right online now. Okay, good.
Okay. Just reading
for some connection to come up.
Yeah. Alex, thank you so much. Can you hear me?
I can hear you. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Thank you so much for your submission.
We have five minutes with you. Yep. Thank you.
I hope I can fill the five minutes.
You can speak to your submission for as long
as you like within five minutes,
and if there is any time left,
there might be questions from members.
Sure. Okay. Thank you.
Alright, so, um, I listened to the, uh,
telecommunications side of things, the science there,
but for me, this bill is more about privacy, um,
uh, requiring, uh, providers to, um,
increase access, government access, um,
uh, in that, um,
because a lot of us are on platforms these days
that are encrypted and stuff like that.
We have our weak communities, we have our chats
and, um, I think that this bill is
about privacy ultimately.
Um, and not just the privacy that's in your head,
but the privacy that you share with like-minded individuals.
Now, I promise you I'm not a threat to anyone,
but at the same time, I, I see myself as a Christian, right?
Um, I'm never gonna see things the way a Muslim
person would see them.
And I should also say
that I don't really talk about things like that anyway,
but I think that somebody's thoughts
and expressions, I think they're a God-given, right.
You know, and, um, being able
to probe people's conversations is a breach of that, right?
We have a privacy act that virtually means nothing today.
Um, it doesn't really protect us, it brings us under.
Um, it's like
whenever we're asked to share details,
it's like we're contracting.
Um, and if we wanna keep our details private
or our lives private, um, the system
or the government seems to continually be wanting to
access those for why?
I don't know. Um,
like when I was growing up, most Kiwis thought
relatively the same.
I think, you know, sport, you know, uh,
social, et cetera.
There's been a lot of immigration over the years.
And I'm not against immigration
because my mom's an immigrant,
but what I see is a lot of different cultures coming in,
making it even harder to find the unity
that we used to have.
Um, and I don't believe that government can legislate unity
by simply shutting down thoughts, you know?
Um, so what I saw in the amendment Bill
and other stuff is, um, powers to,
uh, go to internet providers
and, you know, ask for access that they don't have now.
And if, um,
if this goes against our privacy, if it goes against our,
our fundamental human rights, we've got a bill of rights
and, and it seems to be being eroded
with just about every second little bit of legislation
that comes down the pike lately,
the last few years ever since COVID.
You know, it just seems to be more and more control
or a desire by government to control more and more.
And, uh, I just feel like rebelling against that control
because I don't want my privacy breached.
I don't want to be told where I can go and what I can do.
Often reason, of course, I'm a reasonable person.
I don't go around committing crimes or hurting people.
I'm not like that, you know?
But I care about my privacy and my telecommunications.
I'm on many platforms. I belong to many groups.
Uh, I don't ascribe to all the values
that those groups hold,
but you know, I reserve the right to, um,
I'm waffling, aren't I really?
I just don't wanna see us moving into an Orwellian type
situation with, uh, more and more surveillance.
And that's what this is ultimately about is surveillance,
you know, and I, I don't think we need it.
I've been to places like England
and stuff like that where they've got CCTV on every corner.
And while it may look quite good on some
of the British cop shows, you know, that they can,
you know. Um,
Sorry to interrupt. Alexa,
I'm the start.
You were worried how you're going to talk for five minutes?
Guess it's already five minutes.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you for your contribution.
I shoulda have prepared, I shoulda have prepared,
but you get the guest if, if you can't guarantee my privacy,
I don't think this bill should proceed.
Thank you for your submission. Good summary.
I thank you. Good day.
Um, alright, members, we go in private.